# Useful tools

A list of tools and programs that I find useful.

TODO: explanation
TODO: add aerc, amfora, catgirl, birch, bollux, chue, delta, dust, exa, pesc, hyperfine, jp, litterbox, weechat, irssi(?), alpine linux, frankenwm, i3wm

## Arch Linux

=> https://archlinux.org

### Pros
- Pacman package manager
- rolling release (you're always using the latest version!)
- great community(?)
- you get to say that yOu UsE aRcH bTw

### Cons
- Pacman package manager
- Arch uses `systemd`, and there's no way to change that.
- Arch uses `glibc`, and there's no way to change that.
- Arch uses GNU Coreutils, and it's difficult to change it to, say, Busybox or sbase.

## KISS Linux

=> https://k1ss.org

### Pros
- Rugged mnmlist mentality.
- Easy to switch out system components with others, unlike Arch.
- Extremely simple package format, which makes creating your own package repositories a breeze.

### Cons
- Rugged mnmlist mentality.
- You've gotta compile your own kernel, which can lead to a lot of fun if you want to enable certain obscure features  like, say, Wifi. I still haven't been able to get Wifi properly.

## Void Linux

=> https://voidlinux.org

### Pros
- Runs on many architectures.
- Ability to choose between `glibc` and `musl`.
- uses `runit`, not systemd.

## CRUX Linux

=> https://crux.nu

### Pros
- extremely simple package format and package manager.
- easy to setup you're own package repository (necessary, since like KISS, not that many packages exist in the repos).

### Cons
- sparse community. not that many people use it, sadly.
- **most** packages are missing proper footprint/md5sums.
 
## AwesomeWM
### Pros
- since a lot of Awesome's behaviour and aesthetics can be tweaked via it's Lua API, Awesome can be anything you want it to be.
- lots of layouts to choose from, including tiling and floating.

### Cons
- due to configuration being done in a programming language, executed at runtime, I find Awesome has a tendency to be a bit laggy at times.
- no support for manual tiling... yet. Not a problem for me personally but I've heard lots of other ricers complaining about this.

## DWM

=> https://dwm.suckless.org/

### Pros
- Configuration is in the source. This is precisely what makes dwm so extensible: the fact that the configuration is a part of the code means that you can call custom C functions from your config and from X11.
- Don't like tiling? dwm has a builtin floating features.

### Cons
- A bit annoying to recompile every time a configuration value is changed.
- Many users (like, uh, me) found dwm hard to use due to the fact that it ships with a minimal set of features, and patches must be applied to use certain features (such as a scratchpad). I recommend using [Luke Smith's setup](https://github.com/LukeSmithxyz) as a starting point, and to build up from there. Optionally, you can use [Mitch Weaver's setup](https://github.com/mitchweaver/suckless).
- The default bar, included with dwm, can be difficult to customize.
- Polybar doesn't work too well with it by default. Usually, you'll have to add `override-redirect = true` to you're Polybar config. Sometimes it's worse.

## sowm

=> https://github.com/dylanaraps/sowm

### Pros
- It's __*floating*__.
- It has it's configuration in the source.
- Very simple and readable source code, which makes it ridiculously easy to modify.
- No borders (without patches).

### Cons
- it's __*floating*__.
- It has it's configuration in the source.
- No borders (without patches).
- No EWMH support.

## 2bwm

### Pros
- Hey, two borders!!
- Although it's floating, you can manage most window-related tasks with the keyboard alone.

### Cons
- It has it's configuration in the (IMO poorly-formatted) source.


## Alacritty

=> https://github.com/jwilm/alacritty

### Pros
- GPU rendered, which makes this terminal blazingly fast - provided, of course, you have a good GPU in the first place.

### Cons
- If you don't have a good GPU, or if you are on a platform that doesn't support OpenGL (like my Raspberry Pi Zero), alacritty doesn't work.
- Configuration is in YAML. This may be a good or bad thing depending on whether you're a YAML fan, but in my experience editing yaml files can be extremely tedious.

## XTerm
- It Just Works™.
- By default, xterm is extremely ugly, which tends to discourage new users from using it.
- Huge, at about 65K lines of code. Compare to (unpatched) st, which is just 5K loc.
- xterm can be Very Slow (depending on what you're doing).
- Configuration is in an esoteric configuration language commonly known as Xresources.

TODO: rewrite the next three sections.
### misc
- `loksh`: an implementation of the Korn Shell that's way better than `bash`. `bash`: 1.1M, `loksh`: 241K
- `mksh`: like `loksh`, but with some extra features such as `HERESTRINGS`.
- [`ly`](https://github.com/cyglom/ly): a minimal console-based display manager that, as a bonus, has a cool DOOM animation.
- [`slock`](https://tools.suckless.org/slock): the simplest lockscreen that I know of.
- `scdoc`: A markup format that compiles to mandoc.
- [`lcharmap`](https://github.com/lptstr/lcharmap): a little utility like the Windows `charmap.exe` ported to Linux.
- [`rsfetch`](https://github.com/rsfetch/rsfetch): a blazingly fast (<5ms) fetch program.

### Programming languages
- `C`: yep, raw C is the still the best language on earth, contrary to the opinion of some jAvAsCrIpT heretics.
- `Rust`: best described as a modern version of C++ obsessed with memory safety. Great when you're building something
that needs to be robust.
- `PowerShell`: not quite a shell - more of an interpreted language often mistaken for a shell.
- `Zig`: a (WIP) language that aims to replace C.
- `Lua`: the languages simplicity makes Lua ideal for small programs and "scripts" -- unfortunately, the standard library is rather sparse.

## Some fonts
- `ttyp0`: a better version of `misc-fixed`.
- [`cozette`](https://github.com/slavfox/Cozette): a comfy font derived from Dina/proggy and heavily influenced by creep.
