# Gemini IRC logs

Here are some links to view logs from the unofficial Gemini IRC channel on irc.tilde.chat.

=> ./today.gmi   Today's logs
=> ./logs.txt    Download all logs in plain text
=> ./logs.db     Download all logs in the format used by litterbox's database (sqlite3)
=> ./search.gmi  Search logs
=> ./all.gmi     All logs


Report any issues to kiedtl＠tilde.team (do not copy-paste).


## Search syntax

A special syntax can be used to employ search filters in your queries. This may be somewhat familiar from other search engines. The syntax is ":filter=value :filter2=value [search keywords]"; examples can be found below:

```
    # search for all instances before November 8, 2020, where a user named
    # "wdca" joined the channel.
    :before=2020-11-08 :event=join :nick=wdca

    # search for all messages with the word "amfora"
    :event=privmsg amfora

    # search all messages, joins, quits, parts, etc. before October 3, 2020 that
    # contain the word "bombadillo", and limit the number of results to 10.
    :before=2020-10-03 :limit=10 bombadillo
```

Below is a list of recognized search filters.


### :after=<date>[T<time>]

Search for events that occurred after <date> and <time>. <date> and <time> are in the format of "YYYY-MM-DD" and "HH:MM:SS"; the time is optional, but if it is included, it must be joined to the date with a "T". Example: ":after=2020-11-08T12:45:00".


### :before=<date>[T<time>]

Like ":after=", but matches events before the provided date and time.


### :date=<date>

Search for events that occurred on <date>. The provided date, as with ":after=" and ":before=", is in the format of "YYYY-MM-DD".


### :event=<type>

Only show events of type <type>, where <type> is one of "privmsg", "notice", "action", "join", "part", "quit", "kick", "nick", "topic", "ban", or "unban".


### :limit=<limit>

Show only <limit> results.


### :nick=<nickname>

Search for events by <nickname>.


### :host=<hostname>

Search for events by users with a host matching <hostname>.


### :user=<username>

Search for events by users matching <username>.


### :width=<chars>

Wrap search results at <chars> characters. This is not a search filter so much as it is a formatting option.


## TODO

* Patch litterbox to handle BATCH IRC messages correctly.
* Rewrite scoop in Lua; use to handle download/today/search pages.
* Import ~tomasino's logs.


## Acknowledgments

Thanks to:

* ~tomasino, for assisting with the search documentation and for suggesting this mini-project.

This project uses:

* A patched version of litterbox [0] to log, index, and search IRC events:

=> https://git.causal.agency/litterbox
